Schools of the Bujinkan Summaries

The schools of the Bujinkan are: 

Togakure-ryū
Gyokushin-ryū
Kumogakure-ryū
Gikan-ryū
Gyokko-ryū
Koto-ryū
Shinden Fudō-ryū
Kukishinden-ryū
Takagi Yōshin-ryū

---

Ninjutsu Schools:
- Togakure Ryu Ninpo Taijutsu: Focuses on stealth, infiltration, and combat. 
- Gyokushin Ryu Ninpo: Emphasizes techniques for gathering information and deception. 
- Kumogakure Ryu Ninpo: Known for its techniques of concealment and surprise attacks. 

Samurai Schools:
- Gyokko Ryu Kosshijutsu: Emphasizes striking techniques that target the skeletal and muscular systems. 
- Koto Ryu Koppojutsu: Focuses on techniques that break bones and joints. 
- Gikan Ryu Koppojutsu: Another school that specializes in skeletal manipulation. 
- Shinden Fudo Ryu Dakentaijutsu: Emphasizes natural body movement and striking techniques. 
- Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu: Known for its grappling and close-quarters combat techniques. 
- Kuki Shinden Ryu Happo Bikenjutsu: A comprehensive school that includes various weapons and combat strategies. 

---

Update to Bujinkan Leadership:

Hatsumi Sensei has retired from teaching and has passed on Sokeship of each of the schools. He still remains the leader of the Bujinkan overall.

Ishizuka Tetsuji became the 29th soke of Gyokko-ryū in November 2019. He passed away in March 2025.

Yukio Noguchi became the 19th soke of Kotō-ryū in the beginning of 2020

Toshiro Nagato became the 27th soke of Shinden Fudo-ryū in November 2019

Sakasai Norio became the 18th soke of Takagi Yōshin-ryū and the 16th soke of Gikan-ryū in March 2025

Tsutsui Takumi became the 35th soke of Togakure-ryū in November 2019

Kan Jun'ichi became the 22th soke of Gyokushin-ryū in November 2019

Furuta Kōji became the 15th soke of Kumogakure-ryū in November 2019

Iwata Yoshio became the 29th soke of Kukishinden-ryū in November 2019


---

Shinden Fudo Ryu

Shinden Fudo Ryu, also known as Fudo Ryu, literally translates as “Tradition of the Immovable God.” It is one of the classical Japanese Jujutsu schools (Koryu) incorporated into the curricula of the Bujinkan, Genbukan, Jinenkan, and AKBAN. Shinden Fudo Ryu is divided primarily into dakentaijutsu (striking methods) and jutaijutsu (grappling methods), each with its own characteristic kata, strikes, locks, throws, and weapon segments. Historically, it was the first art that Takamatsu Toshitsugu-who later collected and transmitted many of the Takamatsu-den Koryu-studied under Toda Shinryuken Masamitsu.

Shinden Fudo Ryu Techniques
The teachings of Shinden Fudo Ryu are traditionally grouped into two main categories:

Jutaijutsu - the older name for jujutsu, focusing on grappling, throws, locks, and controls.
Dakentaijutsu - striking methods that often appear direct and strong, using the body as a weapon.
Dakentaijutsu training is further subdivided into Ten no Kata, Chi no Kata, and Shizen Shigoku no Kata (sometimes called Shizen Chigoku no Kata). Each of these levels has distinct forms (kata) that emphasize strikes, throws, and locks, often starting from natural postures (shizen or fudoza) with minimal formal stances.

Jutaijutsu (Grappling Methods)
Jutaijutsu in Shinden Fudo Ryu is characterized by controlling locks, throws, and subtle manipulations of posture. Historically called “Jujutsu,” it trains the practitioner to maintain a natural stance, adapt quickly, and apply powerful leverage-based techniques without formal stances. Jutaijutsu segments can include rope-tying (hojojutsu) and specialized weapon defenses.

Characteristics
Shinden Fudo Ryu features the use of nature as an ally in both conditioning and application. Practitioners often strike with the entire body, moving fluidly from locks to throws to kicks and back again. While it may appear “hard” due to directness of strikes, the system also emphasizes relaxed power, minimal telegraphing, and stable posture (shizen or fudoza). Larger weapons such as the ono (axe), o-tsuchi (war hammer), and naginata are also part of its curriculum.

History
Izumo Kanja Yoshiteru is credited as the founder (and first soke) of Shinden Fudo Ryu, tracing back to the 12th century. Early influences included elements of Chinese Kempo, which are still partly visible in certain striking forms. Over time, many recognized names became soke of the school, contributing additional weapon methods (like yari and ono) and hojojutsu.

The 24th soke, Toda Shinryuken Masamitsu, was famously a sword instructor to the Tokugawa Shogunate and grandfather to Takamatsu Toshitsugu. Takamatsu Sensei inherited and refined Fudo Ryu as part of his broader Takamatsu-den teachings. The present-day lineage is continued by Hatsumi Masaaki.

Headmasters of Shinden Fudo Ryu
Ikai
Hogenbo, Tesshin
Sakabe, Tendo
Izumo, Kanja Yoshiteru (Kumano) - Yeikyu era (1113)
Minamoto, Hachiman Tamenari - Genyei era (1118)
Minamoto, Hachiro Tameyoshi - Hogen era (1156)
Mizuhara, Kuro Yoshinari - Genkyu era (1204)
Mugaibo, Shinnen - Tempuku era (1233)
Ohkuni, Zenhachiro Yoshinobu - Bunyie era (1264)
Hata, Saburo Sasukeyasu
Kotani, Yuhachiro Nobuchika - Geboko era (1321 or 1331)
Kaneko, Jinsuke Yoshikiyo - Shohei era (1346)
Tajima, Genkoro Nariyoshi - Genchu era (1384)
Kammon, Kokanja Yoshikane - Shocho era (1428)
Kimura, Hozen - Kwancho era (1460)
Ibuki, Yoshihaha - Bummei era (1469)
Otsuka, Hakushi Nyudo Tadamori - Yeisho era (1504)
Otsuka, Daikuro Tadahide - Taiyei era (1522)
Abe, Muga - Tensho era (1573)
Koga, Taro Kyokokaku - Tensho era (1573)
Katayama, Hokinokami Mori Hisayasu - Bunroku era (1592)
Shindo, Unsai - Kwanyei era (1624-1644)
Odagiri, Tohyoe Yoshihiso - Kwanyei era (1624-1644)
Iida, Jubee Tameyoshi - Meiwa era (1764)
Mori, Genroku Masahide - Bunkwa era (1804)
Toyota, Jubei Mitsuyoshi - Keiyo era (1865)
Toda, Shinryuken Masamitsu (Kobe) - Meiji era (1824 - 1909)
Takamatsu, Toshitsugu (Nara) - Taisho era (1909) (1888 - 1972)
Hatsumi, Masaaki (Noda) - Showa era (1968 - 2019 ) (b.1931 - )
Nagato, Toshiro (Noda) - Reiwa era (2019 - current)


Rules from the Densho
Know that endurance is simply a puff of smoke.
Know that the way of men is justice.
Forsake greed and comfort; be content with self-sufficiency.
Regard sadness and malice as natural laws. Seek the enlightenment of the immovable heart.
Never stray from loyalty, respect for parents, and mastery of both pen and sword.
These precepts are the Fudo Ryu Dojo Kun, recorded in Meiji 23 (1891) by Toda Shinryuken Masamitsu.

Additional Techniques
Many other Shinden Fudo Ryu techniques exist outside the main kata sets, including methods such as Gokuraku otoshi, Jinchu nage, Koromo gaeshi, and various armlock and wristlock transitions (e.g., Hon gyaku jime, Ude ori, Kimon dori, Take ori). These are sometimes grouped under Jutaijutsu or Dakentaijutsu, depending on their emphasis.

---

Kukishinden Ryu

Kukishin Ryuu (九鬼神流 ) or Kukishinden Ryû The Nine demons school is a Japanese martial arts school that forms an important part of the Takamatsu den ninjutsu syllabus.

Characteristics Of Kukishin Ryu
The Kukishin Ryu school technical syllabus includes battlefield weapons with the sword, the long fighting stick (Bo), the lance (Yari) and the Japanese halbred (Naginata). Also practiced are techniques for throwing projectiles (Shuriken), armor-wearing methods, and the basis for this work, Taijutsu (体術), empty-handed martial techniques.

In many of its lineages, Kukishinden Ryu especially highlights the use of the rokushaku bo (six-foot staff) as a primary weapon, incorporating strikes, sweeps, thrusts, and locks with fluid body movement. One of the ryu’s hallmarks is the adaptation of weapon strategies for both armored and unarmored combat scenarios. This approach allows practitioners to transfer skills between smaller weapons (like the hanbo) and larger battlefield arms (like the naginata) with minimal adjustments to posture and distancing.

History of Kukishinden Ryu
The Kuki family line started from Ryushin Yakushimaru, a member of the Fujiwara clan. Ryushin Yakushimaru studied Shugendo and the martial arts of Shinden Fujiwara Musou ryuu, Kuji-hihou and Onmyo-do.

After the battle at Kuragari-Touge, where he saved the Emperor Godaigo, the emperor changed his family name from Fujiwara to Ku-ki or literally Ku-Kami, the nine demons.

The school's lineage is well documented in the Bugei Ryuha Daijiten, the Japanese compendium of martial systems written in 1963. It has different branches outside of the Takamatsu den schools.

Over time, the name Kukishinden Ryu came to be used (especially under the Takamatsu-den lineage) to emphasize the “divine transmission” aspect of the system. The Kuki family’s historical background also involved naval warfare and castle defense, influencing certain tactical approaches within the ryu. Many surviving forms rely on strong footwork, angular strikes, and an ability to switch from weapon-based attacks to grappling. Due to its extensive curriculum, Kukishin Ryu is often regarded as one of the most weapon-rich schools in the traditional ninjutsu repertoire.

List of all the joint locks in the Tewaza-gata
Musha dori, underarm shoulder lock
Muso dori, elbow break, Ninjutsu
Omote Gyaku Ken Sabaki, twisting wrist lock from a punch
Omote gyaku, outer wrist lock
Oni kudaki, shoulder lock
Take ori
Ura gyaku, inner wrist lock
Ura oni kudaki

Dakentaijutsu Kamae and Waza
- Goho No Kamae - 5 kata
- Shoden - 9 kata
- Chuden - 12 kata
- Sabaki - 12 kata
- Okuden - 12 kata
- Shirabe Moguri Gata -12 kata

Bujutsu Kata
- Bikenjutsu - 20 kata
- Kodachi - 3 kata
- Jutte - 5 kata
- Jo kata - 16 kata
- Bo kata - 66 kata
- Hanbo Kata - 22 kata
- Yari Kata - 28 kata
- Naginata - 13 kata
- Bi Naginata Jutsu Gata
- Bisento Jutsu Gata - 9 kata


List of all of the Kamae and Waza for Kukishinden Ryu Dakentaijutsu:
Goho no kamae
l. Hira no Kamae
2. Hira ichimonji no Kamae
3. Seigan no Kamae
4. Katae hicho no Kamae
5. Kosei no kamae

Shoden no Kata
1. Seion
2. Suiyoku
3. Suisha
4. Kuba wa
5. Hosetsu
6. Iso arashi
7. Fu buke
8. Kata ho
9. Tatsumaki

Chuden no Kata
1. Ura name
2. Ten chi
3. Kata nami
4. Kasumi gata
5. Tatsu no se
6. Shio kaze
7. Yama Arashi
8. Yanagi kaze
9. Tatsu name
10. Kobi
11. Jugan
12. Shiho dori

Sabaki Gata
1. Ara Koma
2. Shika Ashi
3. Chikusei
4. Yume makura
5. Suso sabaki
6. Iso Gaeshi
7. Kaze Harai
8. Kuruma dori
9. Kimon
10. Ura Kimon
11. Uke Mo
12. Ran Pu

Okuden no Kata
1. Fu Setsu
2. Gongi
3. Kaeshi waza
4. Oni otoshi
5. Iwa kudaki
6. Setsu to
7. Goto
8. Dofu
9. Onikudaki
1O. Yanagi kaze/ryu fu
11. Tachi uchi
12. Hane taoshi

Shirabe Moguri Gata
1. Moguri dori
2. Sharin
3. Ko fuki
4. Ryu fuku
5. Tobi chigae
6. Yama otoshi
7. To raku
8. Shoto
9. Musa sabi
10. Tama nage
11. Gyaku nage
12. Uchi harai

List of all of the Kamae and Waza for Kukishinden Ryu Bujutsu:

Bo kata
Kamae Kata - 9 Kamae
Kihon Gata - 5 kata
Keiko Sabaki Gata - 25 kata
Shoden No Kata - 9 kata Chuden NO Kata - 9 kata Okuden No Kata- 9 kata

Kamae Kata
1. Jodan
2. Chudan
3. Gedan
4. Ichimonji
5. Hira ichimonji
6. Ihen
7. Seigan
8. Tenchijin
9. Heito

Kihon Gata
1. Ukemi gata
2. Ashi barai gata
3. Shiho bo furi gata
4. Men uchi gata
5. Kuridashi gata

Keiko Sabaki Gata
1. Go Ho
2. Ura Go Ho
3. Sashi Ai
4. Fune Bari
5. Tsura No Issoku (Tsura no Hitoashi)
6. Ura Issoku
7. Tsuso Otoshi
8. Ura Tsuso Otoshi
9. Ippon Tsugi
10. Tatsu Otoshi (Aka-) Taki Otoshi
11. Kasa No Uchi
12. Koku
13. Tachi Otoshi
14. Harai
15. Yama Dezu
16. Kyo Zume
17. Shu Ken
18. Geku
19. Skeri
20. Gori Kudaki
21. Tenchijin
22. Miki Do
23. Syo Kata
24. Ura Name
25. Haman Gashi

Shoden No Kata
1. Chudan Kangi
2. Gedan Kangi
3. Ihen Kangi
4. Jodan Gogi
5. Ichimonji Gogi
6. Hira Ichimonji Gogi
7. Ichimonji Kogi/ Hakugi
8. Seigan Kogi/Hakugi
9. Tenchijin Kogi/Hakugi

Chuden No Kata
I. Jodan Naigi
2. Gedan Naigi
3. Hira Ichimonji Naigi
4. Chudan jugi
5. Ichimonji Jugi
6. Ihen jugi
7. Seigan Saigi
8. Tenchijin Saigi
9. Ichimonji Saigi

Okuden No Kata
1. Jodan Sogi
2. Gedan Sogi
3. Hira Ichimonji Sogi
4. Chudan Kakugi
5. Ichimonji Kakugi
6. Ihen Kakugi
7. Seigan Yakugi
8. Tenchijin Yakugi
9. Heito Yakugi

Hanbo Kata (one meter stick)
• Sanso no Kamae/ Sanshin no Kamae - 3 kamae
• Shoden no Kata - 9 kata
• Chuden no Kata - 4 kata
• Okeden no Kata - 3 kata

Sanso no Kamae/ Sanshin no Kamae
1. Kata yaburi no kamae
2. Munen muso no kamae
3. Otonashi no kamae

Shoden no kata
1. Katate uchi/ katate ori
2. Tsuki otoshi
3. Uchi waza
4. Nagare dori
5. Kasumi gake
6. Iki chigai
7. Kao kudaki
8. Ate kaeshi
9. Saka otoshi

Chuden no kata
1. Kote gaeshi
2. Saka otoshi
3. Harai waza
4. Soto waza

Okuden no kata
1. Hane otoshi
2. Mata gake
3. Kote harai

Yari
• Kaisetsu gata - 9 kata
• Gokui gata / Kasui gata - 9 kata
• Menkyo kaiden hencho gata - 1O kata

Kaisetsu gata
l. Kanpo
2. Shiho waza
3. Hicho Kaku
4. Hitotsukiai
5. Itto santo
6. Hassai
7. Hiso
8. Tenchi kaku
9. Happo yaku

Gokui gata/ Kasumi gata
1. Ichimonji
2. Kiku sui
3. Kancho
4. Kisasu
5. Hiryu
6. Tsuki buse
7. Kage cho
8. Satsugyoku
9. Kyoba

Menkyo kaiden hencho gata
1. Oto
2. Ryuzu
3. Tomoe
4. Chogi
5. Arashi
6. Shinmyo
7. Taki otoshi
8. Yoko nage
9. Tate nage
10. Nichi getsu

Naginata Jutsu
Kamae
1. Hasso
2. Seigan
3. Yoko Ichimonji
4. Hira Ichimonji
5. Naka Sagan (Chudan)

Kata
1. Nagi Taoshi
2. Sukui Age
3. Hataki Taoshi
4. Ashi Barai
5. Hane Taoshi
6. Kuri Dashi
7. Zango Nagi / Zengo Nagi
8. Sashi Chigai
9. Tobi Kiri

Bi Naginata Jutsu Gata
l. Nagi Taoshi
2. Hasso no kamae
3. Seigan no kamae
4. Yoko ichimonji no kamae
5. Hira ichimonji no kamae
6. Naka seigan no kamae

Bisento Jutsu Gata
1. Oushin
2. Kakugyaku
3. Chikusha
4. Namiba
5. Batto
6. Gişen
7. Shintou
8. Seitou
9. Miken

Bikenjutsu
1. Tsuki Komi
2. Sayu Gyaku
3. Tsuki Kake
4. Kiri Age
5. Kiri Age Sayu Gyaku
6. Kiri Sage
7. Kiri Sage Sayu Gyaku
8. Kinshi
9. Kinshi Sayu Gyaku
10. Kocho Gaeshi
11. Kocho Gaeshi Sayu Gyaku
12. Shiho Giri
13. Shiho Giri Sayu Gyaku
14. Happo Giri
15. Happo Giri Sayu Gyaku
16. Tsuki no Wa
17. Tsuki no Wa Sayu Gyaku
18. Fudo no Ken
19. Engeki Buchi
20. Himyo Ken

Kodachi Jutsu
l. Hicho no Ken
2. Shishi Geki
3. Juji Ken

Jojutsu
(Yonshaku Bojutsu)
Shoden no Kata
1. Jumonji
2. Roppo / Gedan Nagashi
3. Kyuho
4. Hiryu
5. Tsuke Iri
6. Kasumi Gake
7. Ude Gake
8. Kote Gake / Kote Gaeshi
9. Tachi Otoshi


Jutte Jutsu
1. Kiri no Hito Ha
2. Rakka
3. Gorin Kudaki
4. Mizu Dori
S. Mawari Dori

---

Takagi Yoshin Ryu

Takagi Yoshin Ryu is a Jujutsu school. The techniques are designed to be applied in a very fast manner so the opponent cannot roll or escape. It is believed that it was a school for bodyguards. The school was organized by Takagi Oriemon Shigenobu, born 1635.

Takagi Yoshin Ryu jujutsu is also known as Takagi Yoshin Ryu jutaijutsu. (Bujinkan)

In the Genbukan, the line is called Hon Tai Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu, which is a different line, though through the Takamatsuden line.


As with most other koryu, the densho (scrolls) are arranged in a particular order, and each waza (technique), kata (forms), etc are supposed to be learnt in the same order, mastering one before going on to the next one.

List of Takagi Yoshin Ryu techniques
Read more: Techniques - Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu
Chin to
I teki jime
Ken nagare - Takagi
Mawashi dori
Oni kudaki - takagi
Ryo mona dori
Ura ude

Jujutsu/Jutaijutsu
Shoden no Maki (Contains the beginner's forms)
Shoden no Maki Ura Gata (Counters to the shoden no maki forms)
Eri Jime Gata (Strangulations)
Chuden no Maki (Contains the intermediate's forms)
Tai no Kata (Body forms)
Okuden no Kata (Advanced forms)
Moguri Gata (Diving under forms)
Daisho Sabaki (Unarmed forms, a long sword and short sword are worn at the sides while performing)
Muto Dori (Unarmed defences against sword)

---

Gyokko Ryu

Gyokko-ryuu (玉虎流 Gyokkoryuu), (The Jade Tiger school), is a Takamatzu den Ninjutsu.

List of Go Gyo no kata - Sanshin no kata 三心の型
Chi no kata
Fu no kata
Ka no kata
Ku no kata
Sui no kata

List of all the locks in Torite Kihon Gata 捕手基本型, Gyokko ryu
Jigoku Dori, advanced lock
Musha dori, underarm shoulder lock
Omote Gyaku Ken Sabaki, twisting wrist lock from a punch
Omote gyaku, outer wrist lock
Ura gyaku, inner wrist lock

List of all the kata in the Jo Ryaku no Maki 上略之巻, Gyokko ryu
Danshi kata
Danshu kata
Hanebi kata
Keo kata
Keto kata
Ketsumiyaku kata
Koku kata
Renyo kata
Sakanagare kata
Sakketsu kata
Teiken kata
Yubi kudaki kata

List of all the kata in the Chu Ryaku no Maki 中略之巻 , Gyokko ryu
Dashin kata
Hane tsurube
Horaku kata
Housen kata
Korai
Seito kata
Shien
Ujaku kata

List of all the kata in the Ge-Ryaku no Maki 下略之巻 - Gyokko ryu
Chingan kata
Fu mo kata
Iaifuu
Ichi geki
Kaisoku no kata
Ko ryaku
Shun soku
Shunu kata

---

Koto ryu

Koto Ryu (虎倒流 Kotouryuu), is a Japanese martial art school from the Takamatzu den of koppojutsu, (骨法術) , shurikenjutsu, and kenjutsu. This school specializes in aggressive, linear attacks using larger bones to strike weaker ones of your opponent.

List of all the Kata and techniques in the Shoden Gata level of Koto ryu
Batsugi kata
Hosoku kata
Hoteki kata
Kako kata
Kata maki kata
Keto kata
Kouyoku kata
Kyogi kata
Oh gyaku kata
Saku geki kata
Setto kata
Shato kata
Shikaku kata
Shito kata
Tan geki kata
Ten chi kata
Ura nami kata
Yokuto kata

List of all the Kata and techniques in the Hekito Gata level of Koto ryu
Batsu yo
Boku ken
Damara
Kibo
Kuahi
Saki ryoku
Shuriki
Soku boku

List of all the Kata and techniques in the Chuden gata level of Koto ryu
Gohi
Hehi
Hicho
Hida
Hisaku
Hitto
Kakuhi
Kapi
Koto
Monpi
Suito
Teki gaeshi

List of all the Kata and techniques in the Okuden Gata level of Koto ryu
Josetsu
Kimon
Konpi
Koto
Kouki
Ran Setsu
Santo, (muto dori)
Santo, (taijutsu)
Shinsen
Sosetsu
Soto
Ura Kimon

---

Togakure Ryu

Togakure Ryu (戸隠流), (The hidden entrance school), is a Ninjutsu Techniques school that was founded about nine hundred years ago by Daisuke Nishina (Togakure), who learned Shugendo practices as well as Hakuun ryu Ninjutsu from Kagakure Doshi. Daisuke Nishina existence has been verified by Koyama Ryutaro in a period work.

The school contained Yon-po Hiden (Four Secrets): Senban Shuriken (Four pointed throwing star), Shuko and Ashiko . Shinodake (A tube used as a snorkel or blowgun) and Kyoketsu Shoge (A peculiar blade attached to cord which is in turn attached to a heavy ring) and Taijutsu. The Togakure Ryu school contains a unique syllabus of Karuwaza.

History
In 1182, during the Japanese Genpei War, at the end of the Heian Period, Minamoto no Yoshinaka, a general from the mountainous Nagano region of Japan, captured the capital city of Kyoto. After this victory, he found himself under attack by his cousin Yoshitsune. When Yoshitsune's troops successfully crossed the Uji river, a key strategic defense for the capital, Yoshinaka withdrew, only to be killed as his horse fell through the ice of a frozen rice paddy.

After Yoshinaka's defeat, one of his samurai retainers, Daisuke Nishina of Togakure Village escaped to the mountains of Iga in south central Japan. Nishina's native village of Togakure is now known as Togakushi, Nagano, and was an early center of Shugendo training. It may be that Nishina engaged in such training, but the records of the Togakure ryu do not mention it. The mountains provided an easy place to hide from the enemy troops, who still searched for Yoshinaka's forces. Daisuke Nishina, who subsequently changed his name to Daisuke Togakure, later became known as the first Souke (family head) of Togakure-ryu ninjutsu.

Ironically, Yoshitsune was later overthrown by his brother Yoritomo. After escaping capture by Yoritomo's forces, he founded the Yoshitsune-ryu of ninjutsu. The Yoshitsune-ryu later died out, along with many other famous ninjutsu ryu.

The ninja families of Iga grew to become a great part of Japan's military history. Lending their support to Tokugawa Ieyasu, they were able to aid in the establishment of the Tokugawa Shogunate and were recruited to many government posts, including police, bodyguards, and intelligence agents.

The current Souke of the Togakure-ryu is Masaaki Hatsumi of Noda, Japan.

Formal Techniques of Togakure ryu - Ninpo
- Kurai Dori (The postures of Togakure ryu, unarmed or with shuko)
Example, Hachimonji no kamae: A posture that has the Ninja prepared to throw blinding powder. ** Ukemi Gata (Falling Techniques)example, Zempo Kait Forward Roll.

- Shinobi Gaeshi (Includes methods of moving undetected, and methods of escaping in the case of discovery)
Example, Shige gaeshi: While lying on top of a van (Could be any horizontal surface that is raised above the ground) the Ninja is spotted, he throws blinding powder and maybe shuriken, then rolls (in a particular way) to the side opposite the enemy and runs off or finds a better hiding place.

- Santo Tonko no Kata (Vanishing forms, makes use of blinding powder, shuriken etc; these are also used in the case of discovery but this time the opponent attacks)
Example, 'Happo kiri gakure gata': The Ninja is surrounded by swordsmen, the Ninja throws shuriken at the front attackers and blinding powder to the rear.


- Sakkijutsu.
- The Kyoketsu Shoge had no formal techniques.

- Ninja Bikenjutsu (Methods of using the Ninja sword, which was shorter and straighter than the Katana)

- Kurai Dori (Sword 'postures', there are also five methods of attaching the sword to the body.)
Example, Totoku hyoshi: A posture for deflecting projectiles

- Iaijutsu (Sword drawing)
Example, Katate nuki: Drawing the sword with one hand in a particular way.

- Biken Kata (Sword forms, the Ninja method of using the sword is unusual.)
Example, Itto ryu dan: The sword is thrown at the enemy/enemies, the Ninja would either retrieve the sword or just run off.

List of Togakure Ryu Biken Kata:
- Hi-Ryu no Ken
- Kasumi no Ken
- Muso no Ken (Ura Nami)
- Dato No Ken
- Issen Ken
- Rai-Ko no Ken
- Itto Nage
- Itto Giri
- Kiri Kaeshi
- Sute-Mi
- Kage no Itto
- Ninja Iai
- Te no Uchi
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ichi
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ni
- Te no Uchi - Sono San
- Te no Uchi - Sono Yon
- Te no Uchi - Sono Go
- Te no Uchi - Sono Roku
- Te no Uchi - Sono Shichi
- Te no Uchi - Sono Hachi
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ku
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ju
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ju Ichi
- Te no Uchi - Sono Ju Ni
- Sageo no Kata
- Sageo no Kata - Sono Ichi
- Sageo no Kata - Sono Ni
- Tai Wari Itto

Togakure-ryu is taught only in Bujinkan, Genbukan, Jinenkan and AKBAN, but those schools also contain other samurai arts that they tend to focus on.
---

Gyokushin Ryu

The School of the Jeweled Heart
Gyokushin-Ryuu Ninjutsu is a branch of koshi jutsu and is believed to have been founded by Sasaki Goeman Teruyoshi, a student of Gyokko-Ryuu. The methods of Kumogakure-Ryuu (blocks, punches, and stances) are very similar to those of Gyokko-Ryuu.

Sasaki Gendayu was in the service of the Daimyou of Kishu and received a salary of 200 kokuu (Japanese capacity for rice, one kokuu equals about 180 liters of rice) per year, later even 400 kokuu. Like his father, he was probably very capable of Gyokko-Ryuu.

The Gyokushin-Ryuu was taught in secret, in the Kishu and Takeda provinces. Sometime in the 17th century, he came into contact with the Togakure-Ryuu and the Toda family. After the style was passed down to Toda Nobutsuna, it was no longer kept secret.

Little is known about the combat system of the Gyokushin-Ryuu. The system was more focused on espionage and other Ninja skills than combat.

The Gyokushin-Ryuu is known for its use of the nagenawa (lasso).

Kano Jigoro, the founder of judo, was a friend of Takamatsu Sensei. It is believed that Takamatsu taught Gyokushin-Ryuu as a guest at the Kodokan.

---

Gikan Ryu

Gikan-ryuu Koppoujutsu (義鑑流骨法術) is a medieval Japanese school of martial arts allegedly established in the 16th century by Uryu Hangan Gikanbo (瓜生判官義鑑坊). Koppoujutsu means attacks against bones.

Gikan-ryuu Koppoujutsu is based on martial arts skills and techniques that Uryu Hangan Gikanbo learned from Sougyoku Kan Ritsushi, Soke of Gyokko-ryuu and Kotou-ryuu, one of the inputs for the Ninjutsu of the takamatsu den schools.

---

Kumogakure Ryu

Kumogakure Ryû, 雲隠れ流, “Hidden School” was founded in the mid 1500's by Iga Heinaizaemon No Jo Ienaga who was said to have changed his name to Kumogakure Hoshi. It may have originated as a school of thought based on non-violence. It is said that the phrase "Shikin Haramitsu Daikomyo" comes from this ryu and reflects both Buddhist and Shinto attitudes.

Characteristics
This is one of the three ninpo ryuha in the Bujinkan and is known for its Tobi (jumping techniques) and Kamayari (sickled spear). The kamayari and another special weapon, Ippon Sugi Noburi (a 25cm long metal tube with three spikes, and a long chain with hooks at its ends throught it) were used for combat and for climbing - often on ships.

This Ryu is famous for its Demon Masks that were worn to play on the myth surounding ninja and scare the enemy. A technique rarely if ever seen in other systems was Kikaku ken - demon horn strike (head butt).

When going into battle, ninja of this ryu wore armored sleeves to protect themselves Kumogakure Ryu also taught various survival techniques such as making fire in wet weather This school is scarcely seen today and some believe that very little of it has survived to the present day.

History of Kumogakure Ninpo
Kumogakure Ryu Ninjutsu was founded in the mid 1500's by Iga Heinaizaemon No Jo Ienaga who was said to have changed his name to Kumogakure Hoshi. It may have originated as a school of thought based on non-violence. It is said that the phrase "Shikin Haramitsu Daikomyo" comes from this ryu and reflects both Buddhist and Shinto attitudes.

The taijutsu of Kumogakure Ryu is very similar to Togakure Ryu. The Kumogakure Ryu may have been created by the Toda family (also of Togkakure Ryu) in the 1600's, as a ninjutsu school of thought- centering it's techniques on the non-violent side of Ninpo. (The Togakure Ryu teaches that violence is to be avoided). The ninja of Kumogakure Ryu went into combat wearing armored sleeves to protect themselves. Another interesting feature of the ryu was the Demon Mask, sometimes worn by members of the system. Kikaku-ken (Demon Horn Fist, or head butt) gives rise to another theory of the Demon Mask. One of the special weapons of the style is the kamayari, or hooked spear. Used in combat against swordsmen, the hooks were used to parry and trap the incoming blades. It was also used to hook opponents from above. The Kumogakure Ryu densho mentions a ninja named Sarutobi Sasuke, who used the kamayari when leaping from tree to tree, hooking it onto the branches.

Another Kumogakure Ryu speciality involved survival training, and being able to light fires under all conditions.

Iga Heinaizaemon had a son, Kami Hattori Heitaro Koreyuki, who was the ancestor of Hattori Hanzo, the famous ninja.

Soke of Kumogakure Ryu
Iga Heinaizaemon no jo Ienaga Tenmon Era (1532-1554)
Toda Sagenta Nobufusa
Toda Gohei Nobunaga
Toda Noriyoshi
Toda Seiryu Nobutsuna Kwanyei Era (1624-1644)
Toda Fudo Nobuchika Manji Era (1658-1681)
Toda Kangoro Nobuyasu Tenna Era (1681-1704)
Toda Eisaburo Nobumasa Hoyei Era (1704-1711)
Toda Shingoro Masayoshi Gembun Era (1736-1764)
Toda Daigoro Chikahide Meiwa Era (1764-1804)
Toda Daisaburo Chikashige Bunkwa Era (1804-1818)
Toda Shinryuken Masamitsu b. 1824 - d. 1909
Takamatsu Toshitsugu b. 1887 - d. 1972
Hatsumi Masaaki b. 1931 -
Kōji Furuta 